Jeremy Corbyn has relaunched a leadership that was staring into the abyss. Consider what has happened since he last took to the podium at Labour conference. Britain voted to leave the EU, a prime minister who seemed unassailable was toppled, Jo Cox was brutally killed, and Labour collapsed into its worst internal crisis since its foundation. Corbyn’s speech yesterday had two key aims: to bring a divided party together and to appeal to a public that regards Labour’s current situation as a baffling mess. He is a leader who has sustained a relentless media onslaught and a revolt from almost the entire parliamentary party. Perhaps Elton John’s I’m Still Standing would have been an appropriate song to welcome the re-elected Labour leader to the stage.

He could have been weakened. Instead the greatest leadership crisis ever endured by any mainstream politician has left him more assured and confident. Corbyn has acknowledged his failures in communication, and the more fluent speaking style we saw on Wednesday demonstrated a genuine attempt to rectify them. One of the principal functions of a leader’s speech is to throw punches at opponents that actually land, and that was essential here.

Amid Labour’s civil war, scrutiny of a Conservative party shifting to the right and ridden with its own divisions has dissipated. Theresa May was allowed to raid the rhetoric of the left – social justice, fairness, building a society in the interests of the many – while lurching off to David Cameron’s right.

“Who seriously believes that the Tories could ever stand up to the privileged few?” asked Corbyn to incredulous laughter. “They are the party of the privileged few, funded by the privileged few, for the benefit of the privileged few.” He is hitting the mark, for this is not simply the view of Labour’s faithful: polls have shown this is exactly what most voters think.

A recurring critique by Corbyn’s opponents is that he simply isn’t interested in Labour winning elections. Here was an attempt to challenge a false dichotomy. Yes, protest and campaigning plays a crucial role – but Labour’s purpose, above all else, is “about winning power in local and national government to deliver the real change our country so desperately needs”.

When he spoke of Labour’s proposals on the economy, it was technical but none the worse for that. The left’s perennial weakness is appearing amateurish, prizing slogans over substance. There were concrete proposals: a national investment bank, investment in infrastructure, a new settlement for business. With self-employed people set to eclipse the number of public sector workers, finally there was a bold appeal for their support: a recognition that they value their independence, but not the insecurity, with an offer of social security and the finance to allow “successful innovators” to “grow their businesses and generate employment”.

Most striking perhaps, was the determination to tackle head-on an issue that has dogged his leadership since his very election: patriotism. Patriotism is not a concept that many metropolitan leftists are terribly comfortable with. They regard it as a euphemism for bigotry, xenophobia and imperialism. But to millions of working-class English people (Scotland and Wales are well served by their respective patriotisms), it matters a lot – and they feel the left is contemptuous about it. This was a speech infused with patriotism. “A Labour government will never accept second best for Britain” must become a line repeated ad infinitum. There was a patriotic case for tax justice: “There is nothing more unpatriotic than not paying your taxes – it is an act of vandalism.”

And there was calibration. A passionate defence of migrants was balanced with an acknowledgement that concerns over immigration must be acknowledged. The referendum result was accepted – Labour is toast in many of its natural constituencies if it does anything else – and now the party wants a just Brexit.

Though one good speech is not enough on its own, there is now a platform that can be built on. Labour’s woes are not all the product of the machinations of the mainstream media (who are not going to change their ways) or the parliamentary party (who are not a homogenous bloc). The leadership team, which did not expect to win last year, made mistakes in communication and strategy that cut through and caused damage. That damage must be undone if Labour is not to suffer the sort of election rout that would discredit the left for a generation.

Much of it was aimed at the faithful. That’s fine, for few outside that group will watch the whole performance. But the focus – indeed the fixation – must be on building broader appeal. Labour has long haemorrhaged support among older people – how will it reverse a trend fatal to its political prospects? Its economic policies are becoming much clearer to wonks. The task now is to make the way forward clear to voters, in ways that can be digested on the doorstep. What exactly is its vision for, say, someone on £25,000 living in small-town Britain?

The rhetoric will certainly rouse the hundreds of thousands who have flooded into the party, but still it may feel alien to millions. Labour’s leadership must now use this speech as a launchpad to develop a clear, coherent, optimistic vision for the Britain they want to build. Concise messages that hammer away at viable solutions should be repeated as mantras – just as the Tories do so successfully.

There is hope, for what appeared impossible just weeks ago – uniting the party – seems far more achievable. There have been fewer harsher critics of Corbyn than John Woodcock. He praised a “well-delivered speech … with a firm direction”. In the afterglow, sceptical MPs may well feel reassured enough to retake their shadow ministerial posts. There can and should be compromise, for in truth, the ideological divisions are less profound than they were in the 1980s. The bigger concerns, MPs will tell you, are competence, priorities and effective communication.

Labour has endured a summer of pain, but if that sorry period has forced leaders to confront their weaknesses, it could ultimately be to their advantage. After Liverpool, there is a moment for clarity. All sides must seize it. Together they will decide whether the party can achieve political triumph or suffer terminal decline.




‘We voted for you to go home.” Those were the words flung at 34-year-old Tinni Guha Roy, a former member of the GB rowing team, on a London train in the aftermath of Britain’s EU referendum. “I now feel sad at how naive I was to feel so proud to represent GB,” she tells me.

A 20-year-old Essex University student tells me about his father, who owns a minimarket in Basildon. “After the referendum one of his usual customers came kicking things down at the front of the shop, yelling, ‘This place is ours now. Go back to your country.’”

Towards the end of August, in central London, 21-year-old Kyam was called “a terrorist, al-Qaida scum, a Paki and …to go back where I came from”. No one intervened. “A whole line of white male black-cab drivers were watching from across the road, and found it amusing.”

A week after the referendum, the mother of 17-year-old JJ Fadaka was told by a colleague that it was time for her “to get back to Africa”. Twenty-two-year-old Lewis, a Yorkshireman of Jamaican heritage, was abused by two white men on the streets of Leeds. “They repeatedly shouted: ‘We voted out and we get this? People like you should be out of here. We don’t need you n****** around.’”

An Iraqi-born writer and performer, Amrou Al-Kadhi was on London’s underground system a few days after the referendum. He says: “A drunk elderly white man on the tube was looking in my direction throughout the entire journey, and as I was getting off the tube, he shouted ‘Brexit, Brexit, Brexit. Get out, get out, get out!’”

These are just a handful of the stories I’ve been sent. These crimes are a matter of national shame. Figures released last week by the National Police Chiefs’ Council revealed that hate crime reports, after a jump of 58% in the week following the nation’s endorsement of Brexit, are still 14% higher than a year ago. But note: these are reported incidents. Almost none of the people who got in touch with me reported their abuse to the police. One said the process took too long; another said the police were “actively unhelpful” when they had previously reported mugging and homophobic abuse; another: “It was late, and I just wanted to get home and forget it had happened, to be honest.”

Nineteen-year-old Fatima – whose attacker tried to rip off her hijab, yelling “You’re in Britain! Fucking take that shit off, here we get naked” – said she just felt ashamed, and that it would be wasting police time. We can only guess at the true scale of hatred on our streets.

Some allegations have been far worse than those described here. In August Arkadiusz Józwik was allegedly beaten to death in Harlow, Essex, by a gang of teenagers  after being heard speaking Polish in the street. In Milton Keynes a 34-year-old pregnant woman was said to have been racially abused and then kicked in the stomach, losing her unborn child. Last Friday night a Polish man was violently attacked in Leeds.

Discussing the post-referendum wave of racist and xenophobic abuse can provoke a rather dispiritingly defensive reaction. The issue is being politicised – so the retort goes – in order to undermine the referendum result. So let this column be clear: nothing of the sort is happening. The British people voted to leave the EU, their verdict must be respected and accepted, and the debate now focuses on ensuring a just Brexit.

Another objection is that, by discussing this tidal wave of hatred, the motive of people like me is to smear leave voters as racists. This is completely untrue. Our quarrel is with those who led the leave campaign. They made a strategic decision: to transform a referendum on the EU into a vote on immigration.

To win such a vote, they opted to use inflammatory rhetoric: portraying immigrants as potential rapists, murderers and terrorists; unveiling posters showing a line of dark-skinned refugees, and warning we were at “breaking point”; claiming leave was necessary to stop millions entering Britain after Turkey joined the EU (a lie), and that we would be consequently left at the mercy of Turkish criminals.

Our new foreign secretary, Boris Johnson – a joke now lacking a punchline – suggested that Barack Obama’s opposition to Brexit was motivated by his Kenyan heritage.

And here is what happened. The small minority of people in this country who believe it is acceptable to yell racist abuse at strangers getting on with their lives felt emboldened. Their intolerance now seemed to have official sanction. They believed that, given the politicians’ rhetoric, the British people had voted to drive foreigners out of the country – that, for the first time, they had a democratic mandate.

This perceived mandate now has to be destroyed. Polling shows, for example, that 77% of leave voters believe EU migrants already living here should remain. We need a coalition of remain and leave figures to come together to confront this tide of racism and xenophobia.

They need to make it clear that every shout of racist abuse, let alone act of violence, is a disgrace to this country. They need to appeal to the great traditions of British activists, led by minority ethnic people, who confronted racism in all its forms. They need to show their solidarity with minority Britons and EU migrants who now feel besieged.

Of course, racism is not simply about sickening, random attacks. From the disproportionate stop-and-search of black people to the increased poverty and unemployment rates among ethnic minority Britons, racism is systemic, with a heritage that goes back centuries.

Defeating it is a struggle that still has so far to go. But in the here and now, the security and safety – the lives, even – of our fellow Britons are imperilled. Pointing that out is not an attempt to subvert the democratic will of the British people. We all have a responsibility to speak out, however we voted in June. If we remain silent, the racists will treat this as tacit endorsement – and history will damn us for it.




A ruthless gerrymandering of British democracy to favour the partisan interests of the Conservative party: that’s what the new electoral boundary proposals amount to.

Slashing the number of MPs from 650 to 600 given our growing population is, at the outset, “daft”, as Labour’s Chris Bryant puts it. It will make it that little bit harder for already overburdened MPs to deal with their constituents’ issues, particularly in inner-city communities with complex social problems (which tend, of course, to be represented by Labour MPs). That the Tories cut the elected chamber while packing its unelected neighbour is a damning indictment. But the rest of the Tory case is superficially appealing: there is a need to address Labour’s inbuilt advantage, and ensure that each constituency contains a roughly equally sized population. The reality is rather different – and that’s an understatement.

Firstly, Labour’s inbuilt advantage evaporated at the last election along with 40 of the party’s seats in Scotland. While the Tories won a seat for every 34,244 voters who opted for the Conservatives, it took an average of 40,290 to win a Labour seat last year.

But it’s the way the proposed new constituencies have been created that is so egregious. The seats are not to be designed on the basis of how many people live in them, but rather on the basis of last December’s electoral register.

A new system of individual registration meant hundreds of thousands of people were wiped from the register. Disproportionately, they tended to be young, private tenants and from black and minority ethnic backgrounds. Who are they more likely to vote for? Not the Conservatives, that’s for sure. Because of the referendum effect, another 2 million people have joined the electoral register since. But the new seats do not take them into account. According to Labour’s Jonathan Ashworth, the new Lewisham constituencies will be based on an electoral register missing 20% of their voters, for example.

Creating constituencies with roughly similar sized populations is a laudable aim. That’s not what this package does. Its main achievement is to skew the electoral map even further in favour of the Conservatives.

Combined with other assaults on democracy – from legislation to cripple trade unions to a so-called “gagging bill” which intends to silence NGOs – and the picture is clear. Even when Labour pulls itself together and is in a position to effectively challenge the Conservatives, everything will be stacked in favour of the ruling party.

Our ancestors fought for our democratic rights and freedoms. It would be an insult to this great British tradition if we now remained silent while a political party stitched up the rules in an attempt to keep itself in power forever.




The failure of men to speak out about male violence against women and girls renders us all complicit. Male violence is a pandemic: 117,568 men were prosecuted for offences against women in Britain in 2015-16, a surge of almost 10% over the course of a year. These figures are alarming enough, but they represent only a sliver of the actual violence, abuse and harassment women are subjected to: most crimes are not reported.

It was estimated that 1.4 million women suffered domestic violence in England and Wales in 2014. Around 400,000 women are sexually assaulted each year; approximately 85,000 women are raped. Convictions represent a tiny proportion. Putting it bluntly, the men who commit violence think they are likely to get away with it – and, devastatingly, they are right.

There are two potential objections to men speaking out about this tidal wave of violence. One is that it would be nothing more than so-called “virtue-signalling” – that is, men who self-identify as left-wing demonstrating how “right on” they are for political brownie points. And yes, there are such men who exist, dubbing themselves a “feminist” on their Twitter profile, like teenagers who put badges of bands on their schoolbags.

The other more compelling argument is that we live in a society where men dominate every pillar of power, from parliament to the economy to the media. Men crowd out the voices of women systematically, including on issues that directly affect women. No wonder women end up disproportionately affected by policies such as cuts to social security. It would be perverse if women did not take the lead in campaigning on violence overwhelmingly committed against them by men.

So how do men fit in? Jill Robinson is a volunteer with the White Ribbon Campaign, which focuses on encouraging men to campaign against male violence. When she was growing up in rural Devon in the 1960s, she would barricade herself in her bedroom along with her mother to escape the alcohol-fuelled rage of her father. He didn’t believe that women should be educated, so she would flee to the fields to study. There were no helplines or local refuges when she was young.

When she did manage to complete her A-levels and get a place at university, her father was so enraged he told the local community that the real reason his daughter had left was to get an abortion. “I was just a naive teenager,” she recalls tearfully. “Why is he doing this? It’s not how fathers should behave.” She believes men have a responsibility to speak out. “It’s tremendously important that everybody speaks up, whoever they are,” she says. “Men should be taking a lead on it.”

The White Ribbon campaign was set up 10 years ago “because of the huge problem of the massive prevalence of violence by men towards women, and what was so striking was the silence of men in relation to that,” says David Bartlett, the campaign’s director. “It was as though all these men were committing violence, and all these other men were pretending it wasn’t going on, or it was no concern of theirs.”

Men are conditioned from an early age to feel a sense of superiority over women, and to objectify women. Violence against women is the most extreme conclusion of a belief – nurtured over thousands of years – that women are subservient and exist to satisfy men. Rape, assault and murder exist on a continuum that begins with degrading jokes and comments; cat-calling in the street; images that objectify women; the shouting down of women for daring to have an opinion, often involving insults about their physical appearance on social media.

“We have a very misogynistic culture in the UK,” says Sam Smethers, chief executive of the Fawcett Society. “We tolerate the casualisation of violence and objectification.” An atmosphere is produced that makes violence culturally acceptable – and men have a responsibility to challenge it.

Although Bartlett emphasises that male perpetrators of violence must take responsibility for their actions, “boys around the world grow up being taught it’s acceptable ... They also feel in some ways that it’s part of what it is to be a man.”

Society’s reinforcement of what it is to be a man from such a young age damages men too. “The stereotype assumptions that create violence against women create very narrow expectations of what men should be like,” says Rachel Krys, co-director of the End Violence Against Women coalition. Gay, bisexual and transgender men – or simply men who do not conform to an unreconstructed form of masculinity – can also experience violence.

There are so many practical demands that men should support. In a country in which one to two women are killed each week by a current or former partner, 17% of refuges have been shut since the Tories re-entered government six years ago. Cuts that threaten women’s lives must be reversed. The Fawcett Society is calling for male violence against women to be treated as a hate crime – an approach now adopted by Nottinghamshire police. Misogynistic hate also intersects with other forms of bigotry: take the targeting of Muslim women on the streets by white men.

Men have to be sensitive about their role, of course. As Bartlett puts it, the approach cannot be “as though women haven’t been talking about it for decades, or as though men have something new to say”. Smethers argues it should be “in alliance with women, and on women’s terms”.

It is easy for men to turn away: “I don’t commit this violence, I’m not a perpetrator, so why should it concern me? Why impose collective guilt for the crimes of a minority?” But it doesn’t take much self-reflection to accept that the culture of men – into which we are socialised from the day we are born – fosters a sense of superiority and dominance. We did not invent it, but we did inherit it. And unless that culture is overcome in favour of a more inclusive form of masculinity, male violence against women will continue to be legitimised.

Feminists and LGBT activists have helped to redefine masculinity in a way that is more accepting and less about dominance. But there is still so far to go – and if male violence is to be overcome, men have a duty to listen to women and to speak out.
